So basically what you were going to do is get right
in the middle. You were going to take your tanks. I
was going to go in right after dark when they're
going through this town and going on across the
bridge. I'm coming in right in behind them and
follow them right across the bridge. Wouldn't
they know that you weren't one of them? Not
necessarily. Why not? Because they're moving,
you know, and a tank is a tank, you know, in the dark.
Uh-huh. You see? Well, wouldn't the last tank,
wouldn't he know that he was supposed to be the
last? He doesn't know. The rear end has been cut up
back there. As far as he knows, there's another
hundreds of them behind him. I'm going to be those
vehicles. Jim Starr is going to cut the tail off his
column and start shooting the hell out of them out
there. Well, we got into town. And we got in the
damnedest knockdown and brawl you have ever seen.
We were shooting each other up at 20 feet. At 20
feet? 20 feet. Here comes a tank. Here comes a tank
around this corner of the building here, and I'm
right there, and I'm killing him there, and he's
shooting at my guys over here and back and forth,
and it is a shambles. Ended up that they started
giving up, and... I ended up down just at the face of
the bridge with a Panzerfaust busted in my face off
the cobblestone, cut all the way through here,
through here, all through here, piece resting
against a jugular vein, machine pistol bullet in
the knee. And you were inside the tank? I was out on
the ground leading the tranq on foot with
infantry. because you're in close quarters in the
village, I mean in the town, so you've got to get out
of that on foot.
How can you even shoot that close? Huh? How can you
even shoot a tank that close? Bang, point blank.
Oh, yeah. One tank shot another one in the rear from
about five or six feet. One of my tanks shot a
German. This German comes squealing out in front
of him in the street, and he just, German come out
like that, and by the time my gunner could shoot, I
can't remember, I think it was one of them, Jack
Knight, Jack Knight's company, Jack Knight had
one of them. He just shot him right in the rear and
set it on fire. The town was all on fire. By this
time, I mean, my God, we were shooting each other up
in there. And they blew the damn bridge on us. Oh,
they did? Yeah. Blew the damn bridge on us. How many
tanks did you lose? I
don't know. I didn't have anybody killed. I think I
was the most seriously wounded.
And, uh, I might have had a couple of things with
tracks and stuff blown off of them, but I didn't
have any total losses. Germans were, at this point
of war, their fighting capability had
deteriorated to the point where it was a heyday for
me, you see. And they were trying to get away from
you. Oh, hell, they didn't want to fight. They
wanted to get away. And they only fight because of
honor and because they thought I was going to kill
them all. They said, well, hell, I might as well try
to kill him. He's going to try to kill me. I wasn't
going to try to kill him unless he fired first
because what the hell do you get out of that? So you
were hoping when you went into that town that
they'd surrender? Yeah, and they did after they'd
fired several shots, but I wanted that bridge. But
hell, if I could have got that bridge, I just
probably said to hell with Eisenhower and
everybody else. And this might have been a very
historical case of the commander not having
received word and damn if he didn't stagger in and
take Berlin. Now you're going to withdraw him or
what are you going to do? And what a hell of an
episode that had made in the history of the world.
Huh? Isn't that something? I wanted that bridge,
and nobody said I couldn't take it. The division
commander had said, grab the bridge on the Elbe.
That, to me, went, he's going on to Berlin. We had no
idea then that we weren't going to Berlin. That was
the name of the game, to get the war over.
So... So tell me about your wound. Were you sent
back? I was sent back to the 4th Station Hospital in
country and I talked my way out of there in a few
days. What was wrong with you? I had been cut, this
lip had been cut all the way through, all the way
through to my teeth. I had been cut in here above my
eye. This is a shell fragment from that rocket that
they fired at the tank, and I was out in front of the
tank, and there was a piece against the jugular
vein. I was just bleeding a lot, mad. It just cut
that wide open and cut down through here on my chin,
and I guess I'd been all right except until that
machine pistol bullet hit me in the knee and then
knocked me down. And the artillery battalion
commander had gotten up then, it was about
midnight, Colonel Berlin, a lieutenant colonel
working for me. I was still a major then, I hadn't
been promoted, I was on the list to get promoted in a
matter of a few days. But he drug me up in a doorway
and
they put me on a jeep. I'd evacuate sometime during
the night. And I went back and got patched up. This
machine pistol bullet was in the cartilage. And
they said, yeah, we'll just leave it there until it
starts bothering you. It's still there today.
It's still there. Machine pistol bullet, yeah.
Small .25 caliber machine pistol bullet that they
fired out of a window and knocked me down. It made me
very unhappy.
And, uh, That pretty much was it except I went back
to my unit and then we withdrew to Brunswick. And
then we waited until the Germans took Berlin. The
Russians took Berlin. And then the 2nd Armored
Division was the honored division to occupy
Berlin first for the American forces. And that was
in September and the division commander said to
me, don't you think we've been over here about
three years now don't you think it's time to go home
and I said if you say so sir
and he said well where do you want to go I said I do not
know he said well I'll tell you where you're going
I'm going to become the commandant of the cavalry
school at General I.D. White and said, you're
coming along to command a cavalry regiment, a
mechanized cavalry regiment at Fort Riley,
Kansas. He said, how do you like that? And I said,
anything you say. So I came back home and I saw Mrs.
Hollingsworth and our young son, who
was born in 1942.
And we spent four years at Fort Riley, Kansas. And
I guess that
ought to kind of wrap things up for today. Yes,
that's a good place to stop for today. This is our
second interview with General Hollingsworth.
And last, yesterday, we left off right at the end of
the Second World War. And I was wondering, at this
time, were you interested in first going and
fighting the Japanese? Or second, had you at while
demobilization was taking place, had you started
thinking about perhaps leaving the service, or
had you made up your mind to have it occur by then?
Let's start with a Japanese question. A Japanese
question, uh, I think it resolved itself around
the fact that, uh, I had been away from home almost
three years, and, uh, I had been wounded a total of
five times. I
had been away from home almost three years in war in
Africa and Sicily and all across Europe. As far as I
was concerned, my part of the war was over. The
Japanese conflict was still going on, and if I had
been asked to go to assist
in the final days of the war in the Pacific, I would
have gone. I do believe that I felt some serious
obligation to my family and I think that the Army
would have had to ask me to go instead of me
volunteering to go. I had one final wrap-up on the
European
conflict in World War II. I make reference to the
last battle by Cornelius Ryan. We have not covered
certain exploits in here which are authenticated
and recorded in his book, so I refer you to that for
some incidental battles such as
I may have led the last charge
with tanks in the history of our country and I
recommend that to you for reference material.
Would you explain what we were talking about
yesterday on the Elbe?
Other incidents where I lined up tanks on a reverse
slope of a hill and charged heavy anti-tank guns as
the old cavalry led the old cavalry charge. That
detail is in the book and it can be read there.
We were talking about the Japanese. The second
question I believe you asked was had I given any
thought and consideration to career. At that
time, I had been honored with a distinguished
service cross,
four silver stars for gallantry, and four bronze
stars for valour, and had been wounded five times,
had five purple hearts, and was still alive and
healthy so I had
commanded a force of more than 3,000 people by the
time I was 25 years old in battle and battle is a real
test of man so I felt that I had met the test a man in
the face of enemy fire on the battlefield and that
if I'd been able to do that I felt that maybe I owed
something more to my country by serving in the Army
wherein I could further responsibility to my
country and also for the training and leading of
young men. And I know of no other, no other
profession
that allows a man who is interested in people, I
know of no other profession that
offers the opportunity that the Army does for
leadership association with new people, the
training, the building of them, the watching of
them grow, and leading them in battle. And it's an
awesome responsibility.
When you think about, as I said yesterday, the
responsibilities of an officer.
assignment which I ended my career was in command
of 250,000 men and responsible for the defense of a
whole country and 37 million people I'm referring
to the Republic of Korea. That's an awesome
responsibility. with little compensation, with
little compensation,
money-wise, financially-wise. So, to live with
that awesome responsibility on
a meager salary is one hell of a sacrifice and one
hell of a responsibility
in which
The United States Army provided me that
opportunity. My country provided me that
opportunity, and I shall be forever grateful. You
never entertained the thought. While
demobilization was going on in late 1945 and
throughout 1946, it must have been somewhat of a
discouraging episode career people? You never
entertained the thought of leaving the service
and going like most of them back to civilian life? I
think that
you evaluate all of the different
aspects of life at a
signal point in history, as was the case in which
we're discussing at the end of World War II.
I looked at several alternatives.
The first one was to go to medical school because I
thought that I could offer a service again to
people because to me the only thing important in
our world is people
and a good physician who is dedicated to his
profession provides a great service to people. I
was offered without any assistance from anyone, I
was offered a job to start out as a district manager
of a metropolitan life insurance company in one of
the largest cities here in Texas. And not knowing
anything about the insurance business, I could
not see myself on the street corner begging people
to buy an insurance policy. And that was my outlook
on the insurance business at that time.
So I very quickly cast that away. General Motors,
as a result of my experience in the field of
maintenance, had made offers to me to go to
Cadillac Motor Car Company who was building our
light tanks and light anti-aircraft weapons at
the time. I gave that serious thought, but then on
the other hand, my thoughts come back to people and
if I had been involved in General Motors, I would
have been involved in the production of
materialistic things. and materialistic things
are not important. They can be made important only
if they're used to enhance the welfare of people.
So as a tank and an airplane and an artillery piece,
it is a worthless piece of material
if it's standing idle and isn't being used And we
avoid that aspect of things during peacetime by
using it to train soldiers so that when they go to
battle they can live on the battlefield. So that's
an example of my view of how to use a materialistic
thing, make it important to enhance the welfare of
an individual and the country.
those auctions and I always came back to the
profession that I had been successful to date with
at that time and that was the military and I guess
that Miss Hollingsworth
It was a great encouragement to me. She said to me,
whatever you decide to do, I will be right by your
side. And when I said that I felt that our, the
state, and the profession of arms, I believe she
felt very confident about our future. I was
wondering about another thing. In July of 1945,
You were promoted to Lieutenant Colonel.
Throughout the next year after the war was over, a
number of officers lost rank, lost a grade, and
that was almost pro-forma, but you didn't. You
were one of the most junior Lieutenant Colonels in
the Army, and you didn't lose you weren't demoted
back to a major like why that's phenomenal why was
that why did you maintain your colonelcy well out
of
some 15 to 20,000 or 30,000 that lost their rank
of us retained our rank Out of 30,000, 1,100 stayed
the same, right? Yes, 1,100.
And I can't explain that except that
maybe my record had something to do with it. I never
did really know why. why they did not demote the
1100, but of course we were very grateful for this.
We had very low pay, but you know we never really
gave that too much thought at the time,
and we stayed in our Those 1100 stayed in that grade
for a long, long time. Oh yeah, you were in that
grade for 11 years. Yes, a long, long time.
So,
I guess that your war record and the honors
that had been bestowed on you during those combat
had a lot to do with it. Okay, let's now move to
Talvery School. You were there from August 1945
until July of 1949 in two different capacities,
commanding officer of the school troops regiment
and an instructor. Why were you an instructor
second, commanding officer first?
The commandant, General I.D. White, was my
division commander, as I referred to earlier. And
since I had been in command for a long time, one of
the most difficult units to command in our
military is a regiment or a battalion or a unit that
supports the school. because of the great demands
from all the instructors in the different
departments, Department of Weapons, Department
of Tactics, Department of Automotive,
Department of Communication, Department of
Electronics, all these departments and the
department heads all placing demands on this
regiment of about 2,200 people. called the School
Troop Regiment, actually. It was organized as a
cavalry regiment, mechanized cavalry regiment.
It was a very difficult thing to command, and an
officer that had no command experience can find
himself in deep trouble in the school with little
support. I think he felt that because of my command
experience that
I was the guy that should run that. I stayed there
some time.
The size of the military began to decrease and it
came back to about a battalion size because they
decided that's all they needed because the
student load had been reduced as a result of the war
being over and the Japanese conflict was over. The
foreign student requirement was dropping off.
They had quite a number of Chinese officers, South
American officers, Canadians, Brits, and
everybody from all over the world there as
students. That began to drop off. The
requirements decreased and the unit became a
battalion size unit.
Then I was, I guess after 18 months or more, some
point about that time, I then moved to become the
Chief of Combined Arms Tactics in the Department
of Tactics at the Cavalry School.
And I stayed there until a commanding general was
sent to
command the Constabulary, which was more or less
the occupation forces in West Germany. Before we
get to West Germany, I want to ask you a couple
questions about this period 1945 to 1949. One
thing that happened was that the services were
changed quite a bit. the Air Corps became the Air
Force and the Joint Chiefs of Staff was set up and
everything. What were your feelings about that?
Well, it was the sort of thing that
I felt was coming along primarily because of the
size of the remaining Air Corps. and because of its
responsibilities
it
just appeared to me that that was an evolutionary
thing and that it was coming and you'll note that we
have patterned a lot of our lifestyles and a lot of
our culture and a lot of our way of life after that
Western Europe, and you'll find that the
Luftwaffe was a separate arm and RAF was a separate
arm. Not so in the Soviet, but we don't, never have,
and I hope never will pattern anything after the
soldiers. Now what about another thing during
this time Harry Truman issued an executive order
integrating the Armed Forces blocks instead of in
separate units would be integrated units. What
were your feelings about that? Well I'd expressed
my feelings back when I was ten years old and I had no
problem with that.
We had many many failures within the military of
solid black units and so you always try to work your
way away from the failure and I thought that that
would be a good move to split everybody up and put a
few here and a few there. And I think that the Army,
although President Truman, who I knew
personally, I
think he kind of looked for the Army to set the
example for this nation, and I think we have. I
think we have. You said that you knew, when did you
meet Truman? Can you tell me about that? Well, to
sit down and talk to him personally was after he
left the White House. As I'd mentioned to you, Mr.
President Kennedy had appointed me with
approval, of course, of Mr. Magnum there as Deputy
Assistant Secretary of Defense when I was a
colonel, and that's a political appointee,
civilian slot.
And the occasion arose for me to go visit with sit
down and visit with President
Truman was when President Kennedy was trying to
influence
a piece of legislation
which
was going to have a serious impact on his authority
unless we kill the legislation on the president's
authority. And through my research, well, I had
found that a like incident had occurred during
President Truman's tenure and that we had been
able to beat the
legislation at that time. and that President
Kennedy dispatched me, I was in the Department of
Defense, to go visit with. Since we could not find
any reference in the files in the White House to
this particular matter, which had occurred
several years back,
President Kennedy asked Mr. McNamara to dispatch
me to sit down with President Truman out in
Independence and see if we could
put this together and seek his support and also his
documentation on this during his time.
And
I called President Truman
He wasted no time saying, Mr. Secretary, you come
straight away. He said, we'll sit down and iron
this thing out. He said, how is Jack? And I said,
well, Mr. President, I don't see President
Kennedy very often, but I said, I think he's doing
great. He said, I do too. And you come on out. So I
went on out. Sit down, and I spent an hour and a half
with him. still working as if he was in the White
House answering calls from all over the country
and giving people hell when they needed it over the
phone. And I recall one conversation, someone had
called him, and I said, shall I leave, Mr.
President? He said, no, you stay where you are. I
said, I want you to hear what's going on here. So a
telephone call, he said, he answered back to
whoever it was, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes. Then all at
once he says, and by God, now you listen to me. You
don't tell me, I'll tell you. So he was still very
much informed, I'd say, at that point in time. By
his assistance, I brought the material back, got a
copy of the matter, and we were able to
keep the presidential authority in order.
I'm wondering what we're talking about. We were
talking about the blacks and then we were talking
about Mr. Truman. Now let's go back to Germany. In
August of 1949, you were assigned commander of the
Special Troops Regiment in the U.S.
Constabulary.
Now this is during the Berlin blockade. What
impact did that have on
your job? There was a great enhancement of
security all in Western Europe because
we had no idea at the time what the outcome of this
blockade was going to be.
We knew the Soviet strength and the location of
their units in East Germany. We knew the strength
and composition of the East Germans, Poles,
Czechs, Hungarians, and the members of the Warsaw
Pact. But here we were in Western Europe with a
strength of about 55,000. I'm talking about
combat troops. We had the 1st Division, the big red
one, who was later, as you know, my favorite
division.
And we had the Constabulary, which was made up of
armored cavalry regiments, and there were some
separate battalions.
And we had quite a sector. We had from the Austrian
border, all of the Austrian border facing West
Germany, the Czech border, and then part of the
East German border up as far as it exists right
today, near Castle. Well, that was an awesome
responsibility for only 55,000 troops. So, it was
a sort of thing where you planned and watched very
carefully about what you were going to do about a
big headquarters in Frankfurt, in Heidelberg and
a big headquarters in Stuttgart, which we were a
part
of. It was an intense period which really, I think,
triggered
a build-up
to the strength that you have over today. Another
thing that influenced subsequent action that
influenced the intensity of things there was 5
o'clock on the morning of the 25th of June 1950 when
the Koreans come charging across the DMZ And my
God, people are trying to get out of Europe to go to
the Korean conflict, and we were faced with a
conflict there. The intensity of the Warsaw Pact
was exacerbated by excessive patrolling and
activity all along the front. I remember very well
at 2 o'clock in the morning, I had a flash message
from a cavalry troop at Hof, Germany,
and I was called to the headquarters. At this point
in time, I was chief of operations for Seventh
Army. Now I've been growing up to Seventh Army. I
was chief of operations in the G3 section. A duty
officer called me two o'clock in the morning, can
you please come to headquarters, we have a flash
top secret message from the front.
I jumped in my clothes, I lived ten minutes away
from headquarters. Got to headquarters, got in
there, looked at the message. I called my boss, who
was a brigadier general, and I said, keep a
watchful eye on this situation, and he said, well,
I'll be there soon. I said, okay.
We spent the rest of the night there, and during the
night, we prepared a message for the Army
commander to send back to the United States to
evacuate our civilians out of there, civilian
dependents. What did the flash message say? The
flash message was that there was a Soviet tank
company had gathered itself up just across from a
crossing point. And we had one small cavalry
platoon there. That's all. That's all we could
afford. They had a whole tank company of thirteen
tanks. And they had moved down there and they were
making
signs of coming across the border. And if they had,
that would have started it, and we had nothing to
stop it with. Our little cavalry platoon would
have been eaten up in a few minutes, and here they
come. So you don't want dependents around in the
country when that does, because dependents are a
great hindrance to you, because it's very
difficult to get a human being to to leave his wife
or children unknowingly what's going to happen to
them and go out to fight and hoping that somebody
else is going to take care of them, he's usually
going to say, to hell with that. I'm not going to
leave them to go anywhere until I get my family out
of here. And then after I do that, I'll come back and
fight. Well, you've got to have all of them say
that, then you've lost the battle. Oh, for sure. So
that's a trouble with dependents in an area which
may be threatened. But it was an intense period, no
question about that. Now NATO was formed at this
time, North Atlanta Treaty Organization in 1949.
Did you have any dealings with that? The only
dealings I had was to work out war plans with the
French and to conduct exercises. with them and
where they were participants. And I was extremely
worried about that because the communist
infiltration into France at that time was pretty
strong. And I was really very hesitant to pass on
top secret information during training
exercises, joint exercises, to the French. Did
you pass on that information? Yes, I did. Yes, I
did.
like it at the time, as it was. What did you think of
the quality of the French? I thought the French
were no better than they were, I felt, in World War
II, which wasn't very far off.
The French suffered a disastrous slaughter of
their leadership during World War I.
was questioned the recovery today. Questioned
the recovery
today. Their tactics during World War II, imagine
no line.
Imagine no line complex.
We must never allow that to happen in this country.
We just can't allow it to happen. I'm afraid it
still exists in the minds of
some of the French.
I visited
some of their commanders in 1976, 77,
and
I was
impressed with the fact that there are a few
old-time World War II leaders still around who
know what war is all about,
but their armed forces have been treated very
shabbily
from the standpoint of conventional capability.
I doubt that they could fight more than 30 days
sustained action without losing a hell of a lot of
equipment that couldn't be replaced and also
running out of ammunition in many instances. They
have spent their money on nukes. And kind of like
this country, no one can ever afford to have a
nuclear war, but on the other hand, you can't
afford not to have that option since the other guys
got the option. But in my private view, it'll be way
beyond the 50th century before anybody ever fires
a nuclear weapon for anything other than making
electricity. And that we ought to get.